A good AI answer can still arrive too early.
You ask a question. The model gives you a
fluent paragraph, a clean plan, maybe even a reasonable
recommendation. It feels like progress.
But sometimes the answer is solving a question you
have not actually finished asking.
This video is about slowing the first answer down
just enough to keep the human parts of the
decision visible.
By the end, you will have one prompt you
can reuse before any important AI answer. It checks
three things:
Goal. Grounding. Ownership.
What are we trying to do? What facts would
change the answer? And what parts are still mine
to choose?
Think of the model as a bright worktable. It
can lay out options, tradeoffs, and missing questions. But
the worktable should not decide what the work is
for.
Here is a clean example.
You ask:
Should I redesign this onboarding page?
The model might answer instantly: simplify the page, reduce
friction, test a clearer button.
Some of that advice might be useful.
It is also answering a half-built question.
Does “better” mean more signups? Fewer confused users? Fewer
support tickets? A more honest first impression?
Those are different goals. If you do not name
the goal, the model may quietly name it for
you.
So the first checkpoint is Goal.
Before asking for advice, ask: what am I actually
trying to decide or create?
Not just “make this better.” Better for whom? Better
by what measure? Better at what cost?
A stronger request might say:
I am deciding whether to redesign an onboarding page.
The goal is not just more signups. It is
more new users who understand the product and are
less likely to need support in the first week.
Now the model has a scoreboard. It can still
help, but it is not inventing the game.
The second checkpoint is Grounding.
Ask: what real-world facts would change the answer?
If the model recommends a redesign, what would make
that recommendation stronger or weaker?
Maybe users drop off at the second step. Maybe
support tickets keep mentioning the same confusing sentence. Maybe
recordings show people hesitating over a price detail.
Or maybe the page is not the real problem
at all.
So instead of only asking, “explain your reasoning,” try
asking:
What evidence would change your recommendation? Separate what you
know from what you are assuming.
That turns the answer into a checklist for reality.
This is a small habit, not a safety guarantee.
Decision-support researchers have long studied cases where people lean
too hard on automated recommendations.
In some human-AI studies, explanations changed how people relied
on a system. They did not reliably help people
spot which recommendations were correct.
So the point is not: ask for an explanation
and relax.
The point is: make the goal, assumptions, evidence, and
value choices visible before the advice feels settled.
The third checkpoint is Ownership.
Some parts of a decision are not facts the
model can discover. They depend on values, context, responsibility,
and risk.
For the onboarding page, maybe a shorter version increases
signups but gives people a less accurate expectation. Maybe
a clearer page filters out some users but creates
more trust. A model can describe that tradeoff. It
cannot decide what kind of relationship you want with
users.
The same idea shows up in a more everyday
situation.
Suppose you write:
Draft an email telling a collaborator I am unhappy
that the timeline is slipping.
The model can produce a polished email. But it
does not know what you want to protect.
Do you want to repair trust? Set a boundary?
Get a new date? Document accountability? Lower the temperature?
Make the seriousness impossible to miss?
Those are different choices.
A gentle version may preserve warmth but blur the
boundary. A firm version may create clarity but raise
the temperature. A direct version may do both, depending
on the relationship.
The model can show versions. It can put the
options side by side. You choose what you are
willing to stand behind.
A better request is:
Before drafting, list the possible goals of this message
and the relationship risks of each. Then give three
versions: gentle, direct, and firm. Separate tone choices from
factual claims.
Now the model is doing work on the table.
You are still responsible for the decision.
Here is the whole habit as one prompt:
Before answering, help me keep ownership of this decision.
> 1. Restate the goal you think I am
pursuing. 2. List the facts or evidence that would
change your answer. 3. Identify which parts depend on
my values, context, or risk tolerance. > Then give
advice, separating assumptions from recommendations.
That does not make the model correct.
But it gives you three places to intervene.
If the goal is wrong, correct it.
If the evidence is missing, go look for it.
If the answer depends on values, stop pretending it
is only a technical question.
Try it on the next AI request that actually
matters.
Paste the prompt before your question. Let the model
fill in the goal, the evidence, and the value-dependent
parts.
Then do the important step: edit those three answers
before you accept the recommendation.
If the model restates the wrong goal, fix the
goal.
If it lists evidence you do not have, decide
whether to look for that evidence or lower your
confidence.
If the choice depends on values, context, or risk
tolerance, pause. Smooth prose cannot choose that for you.
That is the difference between using AI to think
with you and letting it quietly finish the thinking
for you.
The point is not to think alone.
A good model can widen the room: more options,
clearer tradeoffs, sharper questions, and a second pass on
your reasoning.
Use it for that.
Use the model for options and tradeoffs. Keep the
goal, evidence, and final judgment visible.
Before you accept the answer, ask:
What is the goal?
What would ground this in reality?
What belongs to me to choose?
Let the AI help you see more. Do not
let it decide what seeing is for.